Juliana Mei  
Nov. 21, 2008  
Formal Analysis: Marble Portrait Bust of Young Man  
Marble Portrait of Young Man, a free standing Roman sculpture now on display in the Metroopolitan Museum, can be dated back to the Antonine period of 161 – 180 A.D. The male represented is looking to his right with “a sharp turn of the head”, a turn that highlights the features of his face and hair as much as it emphasizes the bust it rests on. He is adorned in a cloak and a sword belt, both carefully placed in a way to convey to the viewer the young man’s seeming sense of dominance and courage. The piece not only encases a beautiful youth built around some Hellenistic idealization of form; interpreted as a piece of iconography, it denotes a strong sense of pride and longing for the Classical Greek ethos of culture. A sculptor uses line, shape, color, texture, mass, composition, spatial representation, and iconography to create a successful piece.  It can be said that many of these aspects of were skillfully considered for this piece to achieve a result that evinces the figure’s emotionality and symbolic importance as an anachronistic throwback to older, more accustomed ways.   
The bust conveys meaning by portraying its figure as a kind of relic reborn in its importance, a figure from the heroic Homeric past, and much like the Greek, Roman and Renaissance conceptions of the “ideal” male form, this bust evokes meaning by using the "ideal" form as its creative base, a kind of mix of humanity and godliness. This classicism of imperfection and divinity is evident in several respects, form the most obvious and easy to consider. In bodily proportion, the bust is far from ordinary, and if we are to take the sculpture as a piece that urges a recapturing of past glory, then certainly it models a hero’s fitness rather boldly. Iconography does not simply tell us that objects retain certain symbolic meanings, but it also governs the conventions of how a symbol is used.  
The most unlikely companion to this piece is the nearby “Marble Portrait Bust of a Woman.”  It does not invoke the same style of composition or use of texture, but does indeed convey an inner idealization of woman based on the form she assumes. In this case, the woman is dressed in something that covers her, that gives her the appearance of a Madonna without child. Whether it is a direct representation of the Virgin Mary or not is irrelevant; what is crucial is the idealization of feminine modesty vis a vis the male idealization that is scantily revealing. Likewise, the dividing line between the sculptures seems to be one that celebrates the form of the male, while the other is “presenting” the form of the woman—there is hardly an air of celebration to her musculature, nor does she recall pagan days of old. Indeed, she is reminiscent of a stauncher, more Christian outlook on the female form. The male’s near nudity is his glory, his iconographic idealization; the female’s cocooned physique is the same idealization, but an idealization of different virtues.     
From the iconographic perspective, it is not the only male youth’s Iliad-ready form, but also the nature of his entangled, coif hairstyle that sheds light on his more-than-human nature. This choice was clearly deliberate on the sculptor’s part, a choice that embodies the use of proportion, but also the components of color and texture. It is not the style of the hair, but how the colors we see are perceived in said style that counts in terms of devising meaning. Here, the colors are not definable except to say that they create an effect of extreme light and shade—light and dark if we can cut straight to the interpretive chase. While the hair, as a style, may represent some other idealized aspect of ancient beauty, it is the duality of light and dark within the hair that suggest a deeper, more philosophically rooted interpretation of the sculptor’s intent. Any use of light color in such a curly scheme will provide dark shades, it seems that there is an unavoidable message about the dual nature of all men as light and dark, good and evil. Thus, the hair alone gives us the idealized form, as well as the iconographic reasons for why that form is so effective in communicating a persona that is mixed in shades.    
The use of imperfect texture here brings the sculpture’s high chest to appear both as a soft swelling of prominent and incredibly accurate musculature. Here, one assumes that the implied strength alludes to the power of God-like heroes in the Homeric epics, an Achilles-like figure. Yet, the strength is not just a physical attribute; the quality hinted at here is fortitude of both mind and body, for there is nothing ‘physical’ about this piece that is not somehow paralleled by an assumed mental acumen that is equally muscle-bound. This is similarly the case with “The Marble Portrait Bust of a Woman.” It seems all but unlikely that she would have been designed to convey hidden, inner attitudes of meekness, frailty, matronly goodwill, and modesty without a physical, sculptural framework with which to realize those inner idealized qualities merely from the surface image alone. Just as the feminine bust conveys the virtues of her time, as opposed to the more obviously Greek classicist reach of the male bust, the male idealization does relay an inner, more subtle set of virtues unto itself.    
This virtue of fortitude is displayed by the angle at which the head rests, and the expression of calm confidence also plays a large role in our ability to assess the inner qualities being wished for in apiece that calls to antiquity. When we consider that the object, taken as a physical piece alone, encourages a balance of the head, a sturdiness of posture, a firmness of gaze, we are not just taking note of the sculptor’s result, but also, his iconographic intent in utilizing shape and proportion as he has. If we consider the aesthetic, physical balance of the piece, we cannot ignore that more figurative balance is somehow the idealized heroic virtue contained within this less than alabaster perfect creation. If we interpret the aesthetic fortitude of the facial expression, we can interpret that fortitude to be the quality wished for again from long ago. Likewise, the same holds true for the figure’s demeanor and temperament. If external features connote what is physically desirable, they also connote what is mentally and morally desirable. This is true for both the male bust, as well as the female bust, however reflective they are of different cultural values. In the case of the male, the figure’s hair, shaded in light and dark, figuratively speaking, hides the sought after virtue of wisdom.   
Hence, every physical attribute--when considered through the lens of iconography, as well as the other criteria (color, texture, et al.) that a sculptor takes into account—will always lead the viewer to read the male bust’s surface strengths as clear indicators of an invisible and equal interior potency.  Ultimately, it is anachronism that defines how we interpret the whole of this particular piece; the same cannot be said of marble female bust. We often speak literally of a body politic-- but these are works of body politics, where technique creates appearance, where appearance implies inner strengths, and hence, where inner virtues covertly assert themselves in the overt presentation of both these idealized forms. 