Juliana Mei	

	“A Passage to India”, directed by David lean in 1984, is a film focused on intolerance and self-discovery. In the establishing shot of this film, Lean gives the audience a low shot of the raining sky as Adela, native English, begins to leave for India. When she arrives in India, there is a shot of native Indians crowded skin to skin happily greeting the English ship’s docking. However, there is a crane shot of the English standing in the tall ship looking condescendingly down at the middle of Indians. The strong camera technique shows the racism and repression that is evident in colonialist British India. The scene creates a hideously gigantic imprint in the dirt of India that the equally epic but visually astounding movie later fills.    
	Lean is no stranger to the wide, sweeping shot; it is crucial to the epic sweep of his stories, be they Lawrence of Arabia, The Bridge on the River Kwai, and this film as well.  However, unlike the desert or jungle landscape of the former two, Lean must rely on a tighter set of shots in order to build up the dramatic tension of the story. Much like his most famous epics, A Passage to India relies on difference, miscommunication, and the nascent but misguided hope that cross-cultural connections are an inevitability of setting and circumstance. In fact, it is precisely “misunderstanding,” on Adela’s part, that generates the central controversy of the story.  
	While comfortable with Aziz, Adela is not drawn to him in any way that is more than truly Platonic; at best there is a lingering attraction that stands in opposition to her lack of attraction to her future husband.. What drives Adela into feeling comfortable around Aziz is, of course, a shared friendly nature, however, at the heart of it lies all the difference in the world. Adela, as well as Mrs. Moore, are overwhelmed by India in every way. Between the hot weather, the unfamiliarity of the surroundings, and the teeming masses of people lies a recipe for disaster, one that comes in a symbolic fashion during an excursion to the Marabar caves.  
	The caves act as a major, if obvious symbol in this “passage.”  For one, Adela places her trust, however misbegotten by her own strange behaviors, into Aziz (partially out of attraction, partially out of repulsion. Too, the cave symbolizes the unknown—in fact, it is the epitome of the unknown in a film that seeks to explore the inherent human connection between two “unknowns.”  In the confusion of the moment, Adela’s panic is the typical reaction to the “foreign,” a parallel to Aziz himself, yet represented by the darkness of the setting. In the shots that pursue Adela’s run from the cave, one sees a slope that connects to the first image we see of India; the slope is a symbol not only of differences between wealth and poverty, but also of steadfastness of spirit. It is down this slope that Adela falls ill to a kind of cactus poisoning.   
It is also here that she loses any narrative reliability from the viewer’s behalf—it is Mrs. Moore who must make the case to the bed-ridden Adela that Aziz is in fact innocent, that the “accusation” sensationalized by the combined populaces of Britons and Indians alike is a misunderstanding. It is a trial created by xenophobia, not by actual evidence. Thus, the cave’s dark recesses serve their ultimate purpose, as they usher in the darkest chapters of this film. While Adela is not a raving lunatic bent on Aziz’s conviction, she is lost in a haze of uncertainties—not about the night at the cave, but about how the senses absorb the genteel-obliterating pastiche that is colonial India.   
Stranger still, and perhaps the point, is the lack of resolution to the problem. As the only character who sees things clearly, Mrs. Moore cannot convince Adela to drop the charges, yet, she cannot find the courage to stand up in court to defend the “other.” Still a stranger in a strane land—that is to say, firmly British in her manner, it is a sad but just moment when she falls prey to a heart attack on the return journey. While Lean’s Lawrence of Arabia explores cultural connection as a kind of imperative that unifies the narrative, A Pasaage to India relies on difference, conflict, and suspicion as the wind in its sails. While not a masterpiece because of the astounding depth of the journey, the film nonetheless becomes one as its cultural entanglements become far more real than the colonialist can imagine from afar.   
   
