Juliana Mei

Directed by Peter Weir in 1989, “The Dead Poets Society” is far from being *just* theatre entertainment. The establishing shot, young children holding a candle, the universal symbol of knowledge, become ceremonially inducted into Welton Academy, an affluent private school, very clearly introduces the themes of the movie.  The candle of knowledge and the induction represent the changing in the main character’s life and the cognizance that will come with it.  Together, this creates the leitmotif “Coming of Age” where the main characters will come to think for themselves with experience and truth and pursue their passions. This is created by the influential pivot teachings of Mr. Keating’s, a prestigious teacher who defies the sanctioned guidelines of the preparatory school.    
Because of this theme, this movie, set in the 50’s and made nearly 20 years ago, is timeless. The lesson can still be shared today to those who wish to know that students are regularly pressured into a strictly conducted lifestyle by authorities such as parents and teachers. Peter Weir uses clear pathetic fallacy of the seasons and animals to portray this theme. In the first example, it is a shot of the academy in the fall, the leaves are changing colors and school is starting. It is a change between seasons. This shadows the upcoming introduction of the independent-evaluations-of-poetry teachings of Mr. Keating’s to the repressed students who will soon go through a transformation of self-realization. This transformation is represented by a shot of birds taking flight—as the students leave their much grounded self to allow themselves free-thinking and healthy risks. When the students left school grounds (taking flight and risks) to be in the Dead Poets Society, a club that meets in a cave off grounds to read poetry, each one begins to change their way of thinking. In the cave, there is an opening from the ceiling and a shaft of light hits each student as they stand up and recite their poetry. This symbolizes the knowledge that they’ve obtained through the new encounters. Each student begins to live life in a more primitive fashion (the simplicity of a cave and fire) – it is focused around pure happiness and enjoyment. It is a person breakthrough that later changes the students permanently.   
Weir continues to use pathetic fallacy for the drama after the parents of these students disapprove of their newfound thinking and strictly prohibit this using force. Neil Perry, one of the main characters, a student, takes his own life after not being able to successfully make his parents understand his love for acting. Weir appropriately uses the natural requiem of a scene in winter to present the aftereffect of Perry’s death.   
Other techniques that this film uses are long shots and music that further depict the relationships between parents, teachers, and students. In a long shot, empty rows of theatre seats are set between father and Neil Perry. The threatening and dominating look of the father and the terrified expression of Perry effectively describes the relationship in a nutshell. The monastic and atmospheric music that follows Neil as he plans his death and the abrupt end to it at the moment the shot is fired, is impeccably precise and perfect. 