By strange luck, I made a new friend this year, and with all new friends, there is the slow learning process that leads to trust. Over time, I came to trust Jon because he effortlessly saw beyond the beauty of the outside; often, he ignored it outright. Beauty is beauty, he said, and even though I would not have believed it to be so of myself inside and out, Jon does not lie. It is one of his unique peculiarities—but discovering myself has been just as wonderful as discovering him was random.  
	For all of Jon’s smarts, he did not see beauty inside himself. Before we conversed, he confined himself to the labyrinth of his mind, which was impenetrable until the days after I said hello. Jon is filled with enormous amounts of love, but he shares his deeply haunted past, and we make it disappear into his writing. Through me, he swears--with stories to prove it--he has rediscovered the will to write, and he credits me for being “air to my lungs where water would be.”  
	Jon and I have never physically met, but we talk so frequently that it seems we are in the same room. He no longer speaks of nightmares, lacking inspiration, or feeling unlovable. According to him, I am his creative muse and for “being there,” he has dedicated his next book to me. I knew I could impact from the inside, but not as I seemingly have.  From support I feel I have passed on by osmosis, and for the immense gratitude he shows me, we forged an unbreakable bond. To ‘help’ him, and to hear that I have spared his life more emptiness, is an accomplished feeling that transcends physically ‘gorgeous’ to words that do not yet exist on Earth.  