There are those in the United States who look at the death penalty as a privation worth screeching about in compassionate histrionics; the common squawk is that capital punishment is barbaric sadism belonging to gone and best forgotten ages. True as it may be that death is an old fashioned judicial remedy---a holdover from the time where an eye for an eye was a good deal—it is not quite sadistic. We often imagine the screams of death row inmates (if they do, in fact, scream) and we do horrifying homage to their victims by silencing to the screams we should have listened to in the first place. That said, what does one do when death is too simplistic and antique a notion for a heinous crime?  
	Legally, we are obliged to look to the Constitution first, bearing in mind that while that while the founding fathers were conflicted about capital punishment, they were also conflicted about revolting, and utterly unanimous in their support of slavery—so let us not get too sentimental about their alleged wisdom too quickly. The Constitution strictly and famously forbids cruel and unusual punishment for a crime. Beyond that, as the annals of the Supreme Court will tell you, it gets a tad vague and the states can pick at the interpretation like vultures on carrion.   
Still, the *verboten* nature of cruel and unusual punishment brings with it some troubling notions. For one, what is the ultimate value of administrating punishment to society if it is *cruel* and *unusual*? What is the deterrent value in a penal code that is predictable—and thereby endurable—by those who flaunt it? The substitute for capital punishment lies not its abolition, but in improving upon the underlying sadism that gives it judicial purpose. If we grow tired of it because it irritates our faux sense of humanity (as I don’t recall many, if any anti-death penalty advocates piping up after the events of 9/11), we must not lose sight of the fact that without  some counterbalance to correct violent impulses, we may as well be Pavlov without the bell—the dog will take his meat, and he will not wait for his master’s consent. This is precisely the check that an effectively menacing penal code requires.  
Consider the case of Gary Gilmore for a moment. While Norman Mailer lends him a thousand page opus in which he can lay down his remorse and justify his insistence on receiving Utah’s death penalty, do we really care? Are we a nation so soaked in hathos that we must stop at every train wreck and gawk—and for a thousand pages, no less? Where is the victims’ tale to retard our sympathy for Gilmore? The reason for their silence is obvious. The greater question is: does Gilmore’s insistence on being shot by firing squad validate the death penalty, if a murderer can assign himself this as an act both judicial and redemptive? Of course not. The Executioner’s Song is as much an admirable confession as it is aquiescence on the part of society to look past that and treat the crime dispassionately. To give him the death penalty is not to make a martyr of him (as has been suggested of what would happen to terrorists who received the same sentence)—no, giving Gilmore the death penalty was one more opportunity for him to be in control.  
If society is squeamish about collectively murdering a guilty man (thereby avoiding individual guilt for the boomerang effect), then let us not murder. Yet, let us not sag in our compassions. Capital punishment is not a negotiable pathology; its absolutist horror must be dealt with absolutely. So, if death is left out of the equation, what then? The answer is a more perfect suffering than jail, undoubtedly, a more lasting suffering than the mere ephemeral moment of death. I advocate this not only to punish the bad, but to uplift the good. Sometimes good people deserve more than to have bad simply vanish. Sometimes good people need to know their strength is rewarded by the ever creative, necessarily unusual, and perpetual suffering of those who dare to challenge it.    
	