	For as long as I can remember, I’ve been fascinated by Asimov’s “I, Robot.” While the movie leaves much to desire, the book outlines three principles that govern robots, three laws that affect me still as a student, three directives that account for my fascination with and desired pursuit of a major in computer science. The laws are as follows: 1\. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. 2\. A robot must obey any orders given to it by human beings, except where such orders would conflict with the First Law. 3\. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law. As we don’t live in a world of robots that need to follow this protocol, it is helpful to substitute the word ‘person’ or ‘student’ to understand the true meaning of Asimov’s principles as they work within my particularly human condition.  
	As an aspiring scholar and someone who enjoys work on their own as much as a part of a team, the first directive applies to me and me alone. A student must not actively use their status as learner to impair their better nature as a person. For this principle, the man and the machine are one, and no student may allow harm to come to themselves. How does one ensure this? By designing a coursework path that enables me to become fully competent, level by level, in computer design without ever forgetting that it is my humanity that endows the work I create. If we are truly never to let harm come to ourselves, we must be constantly committed to our own self-improvement.   
	While the first directive addresses what should be my right and proper as a self-motivated student, the second illustrates the ideal chain of command and respect endemic to any institution of higher learning. Substitute ‘professors’ for human beings and students—myself—as the ‘robot’ in this statement, and I see the ideal arrangement of respect as it should be between teachers and students. It is not that the student must follow the directive, but that they *should,* because great harm comes from straying from it absentmindedly. It is the last law that is the most telling. The student must give sanctity to their status as student, so long as it does not interfere with their true intellectual pursuits, or contravene academic decorum. In this, I have learned the greatest lesson: to be a thriving student, one must be flexible and willing to change their approach to success. Too, I must be able to assert this without undermining my own nature or insulting someone else’s.  
	Thus, the principles that guide robots in fiction are also adequate guidelines for this student on her way. Intellectually, it forces one, almost as protocol, to push their way forward politely. As a cooperative learner, it reinforces others’ well-being as tantamount to mine. And as a hopeful computer science major, it reinforces the fact that we must do what we do best and what makes us happy. If we are fortunate as I have been to find both in the same career, then we should feel nothing less than compelled to strive purposefully and thoughtfully toward our aims.     
