	As any individual who believes that time should not be wasted nor killed and has a goal reaching passion for life, a great work uses resources effectively with not a single frivolous addition—not even violence. Even the most minute, repressed person, like Bigger Thomas in Native Son by Richard Write or Celie in The Color Purple by Alice Walker unable to find a purpose, a meaning in life, knows that all action has a purpose, a cause, and an effect.  
	The striving and misunderstood Bigger shared one life characteristic with Celie, a knowing-but-unknown mistreated young woman, and that is a lifelong suffering from suppression—where one knows nothing else but to survive from being pressed into nothingness. But although Bigger shared the same insight into life as the young Celie, he had attempted to give meaning to his being and tried to call attention to himself by the only ability he has that the white suppressers didn’t have, strength. His well built body of a lifelong climb toward survival in the Black Belt, a home designated as the home of the underserved, was capable of writing. But how would one use this nature-given weapon to give meaning to oneself? By ones capability of physically inflicting harm on the very source of control. Bigger Thomas, knowingly, killed Mary Dalton the daughter of a strong and powerful white oppressor to create a meaning to his life, a pressed and flattened timer that is moments from going into nothingness. His need to achieve this created his manipulative intent to instill fear in others and control to himself which later became a catalyst to his timer.   
	Before Biggers tie expired, he had reached a belief that everything he’s done had a purpose and he had reached it by seeing that every repressed person had the same intentions he held but not to the same effect. Celie, who had shared the rooting of Bigger, went about a different effect, but the same cause. Her non-violent nature chooses to write instead of harm, express instead of suppress, and laugh instead of cry. The biggest difference of all between Celie and Bigger is that she had found a voice that is undeniable proof of her existence and of her intentions. But what had caused the gentle, young, but oppressed main heroine to write as if it were as important a need as eating and sleeping? It is the misuse of violence, raped by her father, which had effectively directed her sufferings into an insightfully pondering mind that needed to be recognized. Thus, her resolving toward the art of writing to create an existence, a goal, a meaning to her timer before she, too, becomes nothingness. The color purple, a color of respect and steadfastness ultimately meant Celie’s longing toward this and her success.   
	A great work, as an empowered and wisely ambitious individual would say, is a non-gratuitous, purposeful, deep and insightful work: nothing is nothing, therefore “everything is everything” as Einstein believes. Every minute and repressed person is something.