Juliana Mei							Professor Elizabeth Chakkappan  
Critical Reading and Writing II

Mythological Creations: Bratz and Barbies

Naomi Wolf asserts that there is a phenomenon known as The Beauty Myth.[^1] This is an abstract idealization of the female in the production and commerce worlds, and it spreads values that “keep women under control by imprisoning them in their bodies.” The myth emphasizes the great divide between how design—especially that of toys--can adversely affect and control the growth of young women, while leaving boys unhindered by any kind of equal or opposite pressures.  Production goes hand in hand with design: one does not produce without a proven design, nor does one design without attention to sheer volumes of what has been produced and sold. From this mutual reliance, design stimulates production and vice versa.  As good design today is defined by aesthetic appeal and profit, the Barbie has to be, in terms of American pop history, the "most beautiful" doll. In "Little Hotties: Barbie's New Rivals," Talbot writes that Barbie, the play thing of the little girls in the '60s and after, has finally been undercut in her power, allure and influence by the new doll, Bratz.[^2]

Barbie has been sold as a woman capable of managing many careers. She has taken up careers from Business Executive to Pam Am Flight Attendant to Pet Doctor.[^3] The doll was intentionally marketed along these lines to inspire and give ambition to girls. Recently, the arrival of the Bratz doll has forced the rethinking of the Barbie concept. The Bratz doll is branded as a “sassy” doll[^4] that emphasizes a total center of attention, charismatic proud-bitch state, in sharp contrast to the marketing of Barbie’s wholesome perfections. In an economy where profit is always of paramount importance, Barbie today is racing head to head with Bratz to catch the attention of young consumers and to sell the most dolls; therefore, the goal or race here between the competitors is to obtain the best design because that ensures the most money.  The consumers, the little girls, see the dolls as a mirror with which to define their own image, and the doll becomes an objectification they compare themselves with. The myth of beauty exists so long as the item exists as iconic touchstones of what beauty represents to the girls. If the item changes, the myth still exists, but it takes on a different form and has different influences and messages attached to it  
Naomi Wolf has said that mass production is a major contribution to defining the Beauty Myth.[^5]  The widespread influences of imagery quickly define and redefine the meaning of beauty for women. Easily changed, the contemporary definition of beauty is harming and restraining women both physically and spiritually. [^6]  Also, the ever-changing idea of beauty is never the same in any culture as it is in time periods. There is no one fixed perfect woman of mythological proportions in pop culture. An example of how anti-mass production has very little influence of values is the American Girl doll mentioned by Margaret Talbot.[^7] American Girl is an expensive doll, of pure, unadulterated character and innocent in her influence, which only affluent parents who wish to keep their daughters younger longer can afford. Unable to appeal to a mass audience with a design that espouses this kind of youthful purity, the dolls exist as a product for upper-class consumption. At the same time, sexually charged, physically disproportionate Bratz dolls are flying off the shelf and into the hands of easily influenced youths.

Wolf later also states that the beauty myth has not been about women all along. “It is about men’s institution and institutional power.”[^8] It is also a tool through which women teach themselves the mistake of allowing themselves to be subservient and compliant. The Bratz and Barbies enable this error in judgment by setting a standard of beauty for women, but without creating an equally impelling standard of appearances for men. In this sense, the pursuit of beauty becomes a dictator over female common sense, and women are pushed into this pursuit by the irresistible force of vanity. Men, less bound to this pursuit of an idealized form than women, are freer to define themselves independent of designs that are standardized in children's toys.[^9]  
Is the Bratz/Barbie trend an example of the Beauty Myth, as defined by Naomi Wolf? It is the ultimate epitome of mediums. It is mass produced, easily modified to suit the economy, and naturally an aesthetically appealing product. The child’s toy holds influence in defining what women should aspire for and feel is physically acceptable. Wolf’s work does more than highlight the often sinister undercurrent of selling sex to little girls in regards to this product line. It underscores a fundamental difference between how men and women are treated, and sets a baseline for how men and women are expected to behave or treat themselves.   
What is really at issue in the Bratz/Barbie design is the effect these competitively arranged designs have on the sexes. For women, the competition yields *direction* in the form of a flavor of the month design that inculcates the core value of being an object. That is to say, we can measure the effect of the individual doll’s influence on the psychological and elevated self-perception it lends its female owner. Conversely, men—boys--know no such article of manipulation. There is no male equivalent in this aspect of design to “direction”, to that moral (or amoral) push that Bratz and Barbie lends to young women and their imagistic self-worth. Instead, there is only *distraction*, a sense of design meant to occupy attention spans, but with no deeper influence than that. If one looks at the old G.I. Joe sets that used to sell to males (their Barbie, if you will), there is hardly any sense that boys are as expected to learn and emulate from the design. Rather, they are simply meant to be distracted by shiny little objects. For women, the doll acts as a beacon of what to be; for boys, the doll has no such intent in its design—it is merely meant to entertain. There is simply no sexual objectification of the male in the G.I. Joe concept; boys are not expected to draw their life lessons in self-image from them     
Erstwhile, and tragically, women are directed on multiple conscious levels to become the objects, the near-mythological self-creations these boys will worship when their days of simple, childhood distractions end. Yes, the boys will worship the objects these girls become, neither gender aware of the fact that where there is an object, there is also ownership. It is a ‘design’ meant to perpetuate the feeling of gender inequality, and in that regard, it is but one more recipe for getting cultural history to repeat itself.   

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

[^1]:   Wolf, Naomi. “The Beauty Myth.” In *Signs of Life in the USA: Readings on Popular Culture for Writers*, 5th edition, 

[^2]:   Talbot, Margaret. "Little Hotties: Barbie's New Rivals." *The New Yorker*, December 5, 2006\.   
     http://www.newamerica.net/publications/articles/2006/little\_hotties\_4487 (accessed April 29,   
     2009). 

[^3]:   Talbot, Paragraph 6

[^4]:   Talbot, Paragraph 8

[^5]:   Wolf, Paragraph 7

[^6]:   Wolf, Paragraph 7

[^7]:   Talbot, Paragraph 25

[^8]:   Wolf, Paragraph 13

[^9]:  Wolf, Paragraph 3